proper_subsetIn mathematics, set A is a subset of a set B if all elements of A are also elements of B; B is then a superset of A. It is possible for A and B to be equal; if they are unequal, then A is a proper subset of B. The relationship of one set being a subset of another is called inclusion (or sometimes containment). A is a subset of B may also be expressed as B includes (or contains) A or A is included (or contained) in B. A k-subset is a subset with k elements.The subset relation defines a partial order on sets. In fact, the subsets of a given set form a Boolean algebra under the subset relation, in which the join and meet are given by intersection and union, and the subset relation itself is the Boolean inclusion relation.If A and B are sets and every element of A is also an element of B, then:A is a subset of B, denoted by , or equivalently,B is a superset of A, denoted by If A is a subset of B, but A is not equal to B (i.e. there exists at least one element of B which is not an element of A), then: A is a proper (or strict) subset of B, denoted by , or equivalently,B is a proper (or strict) superset of A, denoted by .The empty set, written  or  is a subset of any set X and a proper subset of any set except itself, the inclusion relation  is a partial order on the set  (the power set of S—the set of all subsets of S[1]) defined by . We may also partially order  by reverse set inclusion by defining When quantified,  is represented as [2]We can prove the statement  by applying a proof technique known as the element argument[3]:Let sets A and B be given. To prove that suppose that a is a particular but arbitrarily chosen element of Ashow that a is an element of B.The validity of this technique can be seen as a consequence of Universal generalization: the technique shows  for an arbitrarily chosen element c. Universal generalisation then implies  which is equivalent to  as stated above.The set of all subsets of  is called its powerset, and is denoted by . The set of all -subsets of  is denoted by , in analogue with the notation for binomial coefficients, which count the number of -subsets of an -element set. In set theory, the notation  is also common, especially when  is a transfinite cardinal number.A  set A is a subset of B if and only if their intersection is equal to A.Formally:A  set A is a subset of B if and only if their union is equal to B.Formally:A finite set A is a subset of B, if and only if the cardinality of their intersection is equal to the cardinality of A.Formally:Some authors use the symbols  and  to indicate subset and superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols  and [4] For example, for these authors, it is true of every set A that Other authors prefer to use the symbols  and  to indicate proper (also called strict) subset and proper superset respectively; that is, with the same meaning as and instead of the symbols  and [5] This usage makes  and  analogous to the inequality symbols  and  For example, if  then x may or may not equal y, but if  then x definitely does not equal y, and is less than y. Similarly, using the convention that  is proper subset, if  then A may or may not equal B, but if  then A definitely does not equal B.The set A = {1, 2} is a proper subset of B = {1, 2, 3}, thus both expressions  and  are true.The set D = {1, 2, 3} is a subset (but not a proper subset) of E = {1, 2, 3}, thus  is true, and  is not true (false).Any set is a subset of itself, but not a proper subset. ( is true, and  is false for any set X.)The set {x: x is a prime number greater than 10} is a proper subset of {x: x is an odd number greater than 10}The set of natural numbers is a proper subset of the set of rational numbers; likewise, the set of points in a line segment is a proper subset of the set of points in a line. These are two examples in which both the subset and the whole set are infinite, and the subset has the same cardinality (the concept that corresponds to size, that is, the number of elements, of a finite set) as the whole; such cases can run counter to one's initial intuition.The set of rational numbers is a proper subset of the set of real numbers. In this example, both sets are infinite, but the latter set has a larger cardinality (or power) than the former set.Another example in an Euler diagram:Inclusion is the canonical partial order, in the sense that every partially ordered set  is isomorphic to some collection of sets ordered by inclusion. The ordinal numbers are a simple example: if each ordinal n is identified with the set  of all ordinals less than or equal to n, then  if and only if For the power set  of a set S, the inclusion partial order is—up to an order isomorphism—the Cartesian product of  (the cardinality of S) copies of the partial order on  for which  This can be illustrated by enumerating , and associating with each subset  (i.e., each element of ) the k-tuple from  of which the ith coordinate is 1 if and only if  is a member of T.Convex subsetInclusion orderRegionSubset sum problemSubsumptive containmentTotal subsetJech, Thomas (2002). Set Theory. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-44085-2. Media related to Subsets at Wikimedia Commons