skew_symmetryIn mathematics, particularly in linear algebra, a skew-symmetric (or antisymmetric or antimetric[1]) matrix is a square matrix whose transpose equals its negative. That is, it satisfies the condition[2]In terms of the entries of the matrix, if  denotes the entry in the -th row and -th column, then the skew-symmetric condition is equivalent toThe matrixis skew-symmetric becauseThroughout, we assume that all matrix entries belong to a field  whose characteristic is not equal to 2. That is, we assume that , where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity and 0 the additive identity of the given field. If the characteristic of the field is 2, then a skew-symmetric matrix is the same thing as a symmetric matrix.The sum of two skew-symmetric matrices is skew-symmetric.A scalar multiple of a skew-symmetric matrix is skew-symmetric.The elements on the diagonal of a skew-symmetric matrix are zero, and therefore its trace equals zero.If  is a real skew-symmetric matrix and  is a real eigenvalue, then , i.e. the nonzero eigenvalues of a skew-symmetric matrix are non-real.If  is a real skew-symmetric matrix, then  is invertible, where  is the identity matrix.If  is a skew-symmetric matrix then  is a symmetric negative semi-definite matrix.As a result of the first two properties above, the set of all skew-symmetric matrices of a fixed size forms a vector space. The space of  skew-symmetric matrices has dimension Let  denote the space of  matrices. A skew-symmetric matrix is determined by  scalars (the number of entries above the main diagonal); a symmetric matrix is determined by   scalars (the number of entries on or above the main diagonal). Let  denote the space of  skew-symmetric matrices and  denote the space of  symmetric matrices. If  thenNotice that  and  This is true for every square matrix  with entries from any field whose characteristic is different from 2. Then, since  and where  denotes the direct sum.Denote by  the standard inner product on  The real  matrix  is skew-symmetric if and only ifThis is also equivalent to  for all  (one implication being obvious, the other a plain consequence of  for all  and ).Since this definition is independent of the choice of basis, skew-symmetry is a property that depends only on the linear operator  and a choice of inner product. skew symmetric matrices can be used to represent cross products as matrix multiplications.Let  be a  skew-symmetric matrix. The determinant of  satisfiesIn particular, if  is odd, and since the underlying field is not of characteristic 2, the determinant vanishes. Hence, all odd dimension skew symmetric matrices are singular as their determinants are always zero. This result is called Jacobi’s theorem, after Carl Gustav Jacobi (Eves, 1980).The even-dimensional case is more interesting. It turns out that the determinant of  for  even can be written as the square of a polynomial in the entries of , which was first proved by Cayley:[3]This polynomial is called the Pfaffian of  and is denoted . Thus the determinant of a real skew-symmetric matrix is always non-negative. However this last fact can be proved in an elementary way as follows: the eigenvalues of a real skew-symmetric matrix are purely imaginary (see below) and to every eigenvalue there corresponds the conjugate eigenvalue with the same multiplicity; therefore, as the determinant is the product of the eigenvalues, each one repeated according to its multiplicity, it follows at once that the determinant, if it is not 0, is a positive real number.The number of distinct terms  in the expansion of the determinant of a skew-symmetric matrix of order  has been considered already by Cayley, Sylvester, and Pfaff. Due to cancellations, this number is quite small as compared the number of terms of a generic matrix of order , which is . The sequence  (sequence  in the OEIS) is1, 0, 1, 0, 6, 0, 120, 0, 5250, 0, 395010, 0, …and it is encoded in the exponential generating functionThe latter yields to the asymptotics (for  even)The number of positive and negative terms are approximatively a half of the total, although their difference takes larger and larger positive and negative values as  increases (sequence  in the OEIS).Three-by-three skew-symmetric matrices can be used to represent cross products as matrix multiplications. Consider vectors  and  Then, defining the matrixthe cross product can be written asThis can be immediately verified by computing both sides of the previous equation and comparing each corresponding element of the results.One actually hasi.e., the commutator of skew-symmetric three-by-three matrices can be identified with the cross-product of three-vectors.  Since the skew-symmetric three-by-three matrices are the Lie algebra of the rotation group  this elucidates the relation between three-space , the cross product and three-dimensional rotations.  More on infinitesimal rotations can be found below.Since a matrix is similar to its own transpose, they must have the same eigenvalues. It follows that the eigenvalues of a skew-symmetric matrix always come in pairs ±λ (except in the odd-dimensional case where there is an additional unpaired 0 eigenvalue). From the spectral theorem, for a real skew-symmetric matrix the nonzero eigenvalues are all pure imaginary and thus are of the form  where each of the  are real.Real skew-symmetric matrices are normal matrices (they commute with their adjoints) and are thus subject to the spectral theorem, which states that any real skew-symmetric matrix can be diagonalized by a unitary matrix. Since the eigenvalues of a real skew-symmetric matrix are imaginary, it is not possible to diagonalize one by a real matrix. However, it is possible to bring every skew-symmetric matrix to a block diagonal form by a special orthogonal transformation.[4][5] Specifically, every  real skew-symmetric matrix can be written in the form  where  is orthogonal andfor real positive-definite . The nonzero eigenvalues of this matrix are ±λk i. In the odd-dimensional case Σ always has at least one row and column of zeros.More generally, every complex skew-symmetric matrix can be written in the form  where  is  unitary and  has the block-diagonal form given above with  still real positive-definite. This is an example of the Youla decomposition of a complex square matrix.[6]A skew-symmetric form  on a vector space  over a field  of arbitrary characteristic is defined to be a bilinear formsuch that for all  in This defines a form with desirable properties for vector spaces over fields of characteristic not equal to 2, but in a vector space over a field of characteristic 2, the definition is equivalent to that of a symmetric form, as every element is its own additive inverse.Where the vector space  is over a field of arbitrary characteristic including characteristic 2, we may define an alternating form as a bilinear form  such that for all vectors  in This is equivalent to a skew-symmetric form when the field is not of characteristic 2, as seen fromwhenceA bilinear form  will be represented by a matrix  such that , once a basis of  is chosen, and conversely an  matrix  on  gives rise to a form sending  to   For each of symmetric, skew-symmetric and alternating forms, the representing matrices are symmetric, skew-symmetric and alternating respectively.Skew-symmetric matrices over the field of real numbers form the tangent space to the real orthogonal group  at the identity matrix; formally, the special orthogonal Lie algebra. In this sense, then, skew-symmetric matrices can be thought of as infinitesimal rotations.Another way of saying this is that the space of skew-symmetric matrices forms the Lie algebra  of the Lie group  The Lie bracket on this space is given by the commutator:It is easy to check that the commutator of two skew-symmetric matrices is again skew-symmetric:The matrix exponential of a skew-symmetric matrix  is then an orthogonal matrix :The image of the exponential map of a Lie algebra always lies in the connected component of the Lie group that contains the identity element. In the case of the Lie group  this connected component is the special orthogonal group  consisting of all orthogonal matrices with determinant 1. So  will have determinant +1. Moreover, since the exponential map of a connected compact Lie group is always surjective, it turns out that every orthogonal matrix with unit determinant can be written as the exponential of some skew-symmetric matrix. In the particular important case of dimension  the exponential representation for an orthogonal matrix reduces to  the well-known polar form of a complex number of unit modulus. Indeed, if  a special orthogonal matrix has the formwith . Therefore, putting  and  it can be writtenwhich corresponds exactly to the polar form  of a complex number of unit modulus.The exponential representation of an orthogonal matrix of order  can also be obtained starting from the fact that in dimension  any special orthogonal matrix   can be written as  where  is orthogonal and S is a block diagonal matrix with  blocks of order 2, plus one of order 1 if  is odd; since each single block of order 2 is also an orthogonal matrix, it admits an exponential form. Correspondingly, the matrix S writes as exponential of a skew-symmetric block matrix  of the form above,  so that  exponential of the skew-symmetric matrix  Conversely, the surjectivity of the exponential map, together with the above-mentioned block-diagonalization for skew-symmetric matrices, implies the block-diagonalization for orthogonal matrices.More intrinsically (i.e., without using coordinates), skew-symmetric linear transformations on a vector space  with an inner product may be defined as the bivectors on the space, which are sums of simple bivectors (2-blades)  The correspondence is given by the map  where  is the covector dual to the vector ; in orthonormal coordinates these are exactly the elementary skew-symmetric matrices. This characterization is used in interpreting the curl of a vector field (naturally a 2-vector) as an infinitesimal rotation or "curl", hence the name.An  matrix  is said to be skew-symmetrizable if there exists an invertible diagonal matrix  such that  is skew-symmetric. For real  matrices, sometimes the condition for  to have positive entries is added.[7]Cayley transformSymmetric matrixSkew-Hermitian matrixSymplectic matrixSymmetry in mathematicsEves, Howard (1980). . Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-63946-8.Suprunenko, D. A. (2001) [1994], "Skew-symmetric matrix", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS PressAitken, A. C. (1944). "On the number of distinct terms in the expansion of symmetric and skew determinants". Edinburgh Math. Notes. 34: 1–5. doi:."Antisymmetric matrix". Wolfram Mathworld.Benner, Peter; Kressner, Daniel. "HAPACK – Software for (Skew-)Hamiltonian Eigenvalue Problems".Ward, R. C.; Gray, L. J. (1978). "Algorithm 530: An Algorithm for Computing the Eigensystem of Skew-Symmetric Matrices and a Class of Symmetric Matrices [F2]". ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software. 4 (3): 286. doi:10.1145/355791.355799. S2CID 8575785. Fortran Fortran90