optimal_solutionIn mathematics, computer science and economics, an optimization problem is the problem of finding the best solution from all feasible solutions.Optimization problems can be divided into two categories, depending on whether the variables are continuous or discrete: An optimization problem with discrete variables is known as a discrete optimization, in which an object such as an integer, permutation or graph must be found from a countable set.A problem with continuous variables is known as a continuous optimization, in which an optimal value from a continuous function must be found. They can include constrained problems and multimodal problems.The standard form of a continuous optimization problem is[1]where is the objective function to be minimized over the -variable vector , are called inequality constraints are called equality constraints, and and .If , the problem is an unconstrained optimization problem. By convention, the standard form defines a minimization problem. A maximization problem can be treated by negating the objective function.Formally, a combinatorial optimization problem  is a quadruple[] , where is a set of instances;given an instance ,  is the set of feasible solutions;given an instance  and a feasible solution  of ,  denotes the measure of , which is usually a positive real. is the goal function, and is either  or .The goal is then to find for some instance  an optimal solution, that is, a feasible solution  withFor each combinatorial optimization problem, there is a corresponding decision problem that asks whether there is a feasible solution for some particular measure . For example, if there is a graph  which contains vertices  and , an optimization problem might be "find a path from  to  that uses the fewest edges". This problem might have an answer of, say, 4. A corresponding decision problem would be "is there a path from  to  that uses 10 or fewer edges?" This problem can be answered with a simple 'yes' or 'no'.In the field of approximation algorithms, algorithms are designed to find near-optimal solutions to hard problems. The usual decision version is then an inadequate definition of the problem since it only specifies acceptable solutions. Even though we could introduce suitable decision problems, the problem is more naturally characterized as an optimization problem.[2]Counting problem (complexity) – Type of computational problemDesign OptimizationEkeland's variational principleFunction problem – Type of computational problemGlove problemOperations research – Discipline concerning the application of advanced analytical methodsSatisficing – Cognitive heuristic of searching for an acceptable decision − the optimum need not be found, just a "good enough" solution.Search problemSemi-infinite programming"How Traffic Shaping Optimizes Network Bandwidth". IPC. 12 July 2016 2017.