ordered_treeTreesVerticesvEdgesv − 1Chromatic number2 if v &gt; 1Table of graphs and parametersIn graph theory, a tree is an undirected graph in which any two vertices are connected by exactly one path, or equivalently a connected acyclic undirected graph.[1] A forest is an undirected graph in which any two vertices are connected by at most one path, or equivalently an acyclic undirected graph, or equivalently a disjoint union of trees.[2]A polytree[3] (or directed tree[4] or oriented tree[5][6] or singly connected network[7]) is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose underlying undirected graph is a tree. A polyforest (or directed forest or oriented forest) is a directed acyclic graph whose underlying undirected graph is a forest.The various kinds of data structures referred to as trees in computer science have underlying graphs that are trees in graph theory, although such data structures are generally rooted trees. A rooted tree may be directed, called a directed rooted tree,[8][9] either making all its edges point away from the root—in which case it is called an arborescence[4][10] or out-tree[11][12]—or making all its edges point towards the root—in which case it is called an anti-arborescence[13] or in-tree.[11][14] A rooted tree itself has been defined by some authors as a directed graph.[15][16][17] A rooted forest is a disjoint union of rooted trees. A rooted forest may be directed, called a directed rooted forest, either making all its edges point away from the root in each rooted tree—in which case it is called a branching or out-forest—or making all its edges point towards the root in each rooted tree—in which case it is called an anti-branching or in-forest.The term "tree" was coined in 1857 by the British mathematician Arthur Cayley.[18]A tree is an undirected graph  that satisfies any of the following equivalent conditions: is connected and acyclic (contains no cycles). is acyclic, and a simple cycle is formed if any edge is added to . is connected, but would become disconnected if any single edge is removed from . is connected and the 3-vertex complete graph  is not a minor of .Any two vertices in  can be connected by a unique simple path.If  has finitely many vertices, say  of them, then the above statements are also equivalent to any of the following conditions: is connected and has  edges. is connected, and every subgraph of  includes at least one vertex with zero or one incident edges. (That is,  is connected and 1-degenerate.) has no simple cycles and has  edges.As elsewhere in graph theory, the order-zero graph (graph with no vertices) is generally not considered to be a tree: while it is vacuously connected as a graph (any two vertices can be connected by a path), it is not 0-connected (or even (−1)-connected) in algebraic topology, unlike non-empty trees, and violates the "one more vertex than edges" relation. It may, however, be considered as a forest consisting of zero trees.An internal vertex (or inner vertex) is a vertex of degree at least 2. Similarly, an external vertex (or outer vertex, terminal vertex or leaf) is a vertex of degree 1. A branch vertex in a tree is a vertex of degree at least 3.[19]An irreducible tree (or series-reduced tree) is a tree in which there is no vertex of degree 2 (enumerated at sequence A000014 in the OEIS).[20]A forest is an undirected graph in which any two vertices are connected by at most one path. Equivalently, a forest is an undirected acyclic graph, all of whose connected components are trees; in other words, the graph consists of a disjoint union of trees. As special cases, the order-zero graph (a forest consisting of zero trees), a single tree, and an edgeless graph, are examples of forests.Since for every tree , we can easily count the number of trees that are within a forest by subtracting the difference between total vertices and total edges.  number of trees in a forest.A polytree[3] (or directed tree[4] or oriented tree[5][6] or singly connected network[7]) is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose underlying undirected graph is a tree. In other words, if we replace its directed edges with undirected edges, we obtain an undirected graph that is both connected and acyclic.Some authors[] restrict the phrase "directed tree" to the case where the edges are all directed towards a particular vertex, or all directed away from a particular vertex (see arborescence).A polyforest (or directed forest or oriented forest) is a directed acyclic graph whose underlying undirected graph is a forest. In other words, if we replace its directed edges with undirected edges, we obtain an undirected graph that is acyclic.Some authors[] restrict the phrase "directed forest" to the case where the edges of each connected component are all directed towards a particular vertex, or all directed away from a particular vertex (see branching).A rooted tree is a tree in which one vertex has been designated the root.[21] The edges of a rooted tree can be assigned a natural orientation, either away from or towards the root, in which case the structure becomes a directed rooted tree. When a directed rooted tree has an orientation away from the root, it is called an arborescence[4] or out-tree;[11] when it has an orientation towards the root, it is called an anti-arborescence or in-tree.[11] The tree-order is the partial ordering on the vertices of a tree with  if and only if the unique path from the root to  passes through . A rooted tree  which is a subgraph of some graph  is a normal tree if the ends of every -path in  are comparable in this tree-order (Diestel 2005, p. 15). Rooted trees, often with additional structure such as ordering of the neighbors at each vertex, are a key data structure in computer science; see tree data structure.In a context where trees typically have a root, a tree without any designated root is called a free tree.A labeled tree is a tree in which each vertex is given a unique label. The vertices of a labeled tree on  vertices are typically given the labels . A recursive tree is a labeled rooted tree where the vertex labels respect the tree order (i.e., if  for two vertices  and , then the label of  is smaller than the label of ).In a rooted tree, the parent of a vertex  is the vertex connected to  on the path to the root; every vertex has a unique parent except the root which has no parent.[21] A child of a vertex  is a vertex of which  is the parent.[21] An ascendant of a vertex  is any vertex which is either the parent of  or is (recursively) the ascendant of the parent of . A descendant of a vertex  is any vertex which is either the child of  or is (recursively) the descendant of any of the children of . A sibling to a vertex  is any other vertex on the tree which has the same parent as .[21] A leaf is a vertex with no children.[21] An internal vertex is a vertex that is not a leaf.[21]The height of a vertex in a rooted tree is the length of the longest downward path to a leaf from that vertex. The height of the tree is the height of the root. The depth of a vertex is the length of the path to its root (root path). This is commonly needed in the manipulation of the various self-balancing trees, AVL trees in particular. The root has depth zero, leaves have height zero, and a tree with only a single vertex (hence both a root and leaf) has depth and height zero. Conventionally, an empty tree (a tree with no vertices, if such are allowed) has depth and height −1.A -ary tree is a rooted tree in which each vertex has at most  children.[22] 2-ary trees are often called binary trees, while 3-ary trees are sometimes called ternary trees. Ordered treeAn ordered tree (or plane tree) is a rooted tree in which an ordering is specified for the children of each vertex.[21][23] This is called a "plane tree" because an ordering of the children is equivalent to an embedding of the tree in the plane, with the root at the top and the children of each vertex lower than that vertex. Given an embedding of a rooted tree in the plane, if one fixes a direction of children, say left to right, then an embedding gives an ordering of the children. Conversely, given an ordered tree, and conventionally drawing the root at the top, then the child vertices in an ordered tree can be drawn left-to-right, yielding an essentially unique planar embedding.Every tree is a bipartite graph. A graph is bipartite if and only if it contains no cycles of odd length. Since a tree contains no cycles at all, it is bipartite.Every tree with only countably many vertices is a planar graph.Every connected graph G admits a spanning tree, which is a tree that contains every vertex of G and whose edges are edges of G. More specific types spanning trees, existing in every connected finite graph, include depth-first search trees and breadth-first search trees. Generalizing the existence of depth-first-search trees, every connected graph with only countably many vertices has a Trémaux tree.[24] However, some uncountable graphs do not have such a tree.[25]Every finite tree with n vertices, with , has at least two terminal vertices (leaves). This minimal number of leaves is characteristic of path graphs; the maximal number, , is attained only by star graphs. The number of leaves is at least the maximum vertex degree.For any three vertices in a tree, the three paths between them have exactly one vertex in common. More generally, a vertex in a graph that belongs to three shortest paths among three vertices is called a median of these vertices. Because every three vertices in a tree have a unique median, every tree is a median graph.Every tree has a center consisting of one vertex or two adjacent vertices. The center is the middle vertex or middle two vertices in every longest path. Similarly, every n-vertex tree has a centroid consisting of one vertex or two adjacent vertices. In the first case removal of the vertex splits the tree into subtrees of fewer than n/2 vertices. In the second case, removal of the edge between the two centroidal vertices splits the tree into two subtrees of exactly n/2 vertices.Cayley's formula states that there are  trees on  labeled vertices. A classic proof uses Prüfer sequences, which naturally show a stronger result: the number of trees with vertices  of degrees  respectively, is the multinomial coefficientA more general problem is to count spanning trees in an undirected graph, which is addressed by the matrix tree theorem. (Cayley's formula is the special case of spanning trees in a complete graph.) The similar problem of counting all the subtrees regardless of size is #P-complete in the general case (Jerrum (1994)).Counting the number of unlabeled free trees is a harder problem. No closed formula for the number  of trees with  vertices up to graph isomorphism is known. The first few values of  are1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 23, 47, 106, 235, 551, 1301, 3159, … (sequence  in the OEIS).Otter (1948) proved the asymptotic estimatewith  and  (sequence  in the OEIS). Here, the  symbol means that This is a consequence of his asymptotic estimate for the number  of unlabeled rooted trees with  vertices:with  and the same  as above (cf. Knuth (1997), chap. 2.3.4.4 and Flajolet &amp; Sedgewick (2009), chap. VII.5, p. 475).The first few values of  are[26]1, 1, 2, 4, 9, 20, 48, 115, 286, 719, 1842, 4766, 12486, 32973, … (sequence  in the OEIS)A path graph (or linear graph) consists of  vertices arranged in a line, so that vertices  and  are connected by an edge for .A starlike tree consists of a central vertex called root and several path graphs attached to it. More formally, a tree is starlike if it has exactly one vertex of degree greater than 2.A star tree is a tree which consists of a single internal vertex (and  leaves). In other words, a star tree of order  is a tree of order  with as many leaves as possible.A caterpillar tree is a tree in which all vertices are within distance 1 of a central path subgraph.A lobster tree is a tree in which all vertices are within distance 2 of a central path subgraph.A regular tree of degree  is the infinite tree with  edges at each vertex. These arise as the Cayley graphs of free groups, and in the theory of Tits buildings.Decision treeHypertreeMultitreePseudoforestTree structure (general)Tree (data structure)Unrooted binary treeBender, Edward A.; Williamson, S. Gill (2010), Lists, Decisions and Graphs. With an Introduction to ProbabilityDasgupta, Sanjoy (1999), "Learning polytrees", in Proc. 15th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 1999), Stockholm, Sweden, July–August 1999 , pp. 134–141.Deo, Narsingh (1974), Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and Computer Science , Englewood, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, ISBN 0-13-363473-6, archived  from the original on 2019-05-17Harary, Frank; Prins, Geert (1959), "The number of homeomorphically irreducible trees, and other species", Acta Mathematica, 101 (1–2): 141–162, doi:, ISSN 0001-5962Harary, Frank; Sumner, David (1980), "The dichromatic number of an oriented tree", Journal of Combinatorics, Information &amp; System Sciences, 5 (3): 184–187, MR 0603363.Kim, Jin H.; Pearl, Judea (1983), "A computational model for causal and diagnostic reasoning in inference engines", in Proc. 8th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 1983), Karlsruhe, Germany, August 1983 , pp. 190–193.Li, Gang (1996), "Generation of Rooted Trees and Free Trees", M.S. Thesis, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Victoria, BC, Canada , p. 9.Simion, Rodica (1991), "Trees with 1-factors and oriented trees", Discrete Mathematics, 88 (1): 93–104, doi:, MR 1099270.Diestel, Reinhard (2005), Graph Theory (3rd ed.), Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-26183-4.Flajolet, Philippe; Sedgewick, Robert (2009), Analytic Combinatorics, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-89806-5"Tree", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press, 2001 [1994]Knuth, Donald E. (November 14, 1997), The Art of Computer Programming Volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms (3rd ed.), Addison-Wesley ProfessionalJerrum, Mark (1994), "Counting trees in a graph is #P-complete", Information Processing Letters, 51 (3): 111–116, doi:10.1016/0020-0190(94)00085-9, ISSN 0020-0190.Otter, Richard (1948), "The Number of Trees", Annals of Mathematics, Second Series, 49 (3): 583–599, doi:10.2307/1969046, JSTOR 1969046.