lower_boundIn mathematics, particularly in order theory, an upper bound or majorant[1] of a subset  of some preordered set  is an element of  that is greater than or equal to every element of .[2][3]Dually, a lower bound or minorant of  is defined to be an element of  that is less than or equal to every element of . A set with an upper (respectively, lower) bound is said to be bounded from above or majorized[1] (respectively bounded from below or minorized) by that bound. The terms bounded above (bounded below) are also used in the mathematical literature for sets that have upper (respectively lower) bounds.[4]For example,  is a lower bound for the set  (as a subset of the integers or of the real numbers, etc.), and so is . On the other hand,  is not a lower bound for  since it is not smaller than every element in .The set  has  as both an upper bound and a lower bound; all other numbers are either an upper bound or a lower bound for that .Every subset of the natural numbers has a lower bound since the natural numbers have a least element (0 or 1, depending on convention). An infinite subset of the natural numbers cannot be bounded from above. An infinite subset of the integers may be bounded from below or bounded from above, but not both. An infinite subset of the rational numbers may or may not be bounded from below, and may or may not be bounded from above.Every finite subset of a non-empty totally ordered set has both upper and lower bounds.The definitions can be generalized to functions and even to sets of functions.Given a function  with domain  and a preordered set  as codomain, an element  of  is an upper bound of  if (x) for each  in . The upper bound is called sharp if equality holds for at least one value of . It indicates that the constraint is optimal, and thus cannot be further reduced without invalidating the inequality.Similarly, a function  defined on domain  and having the same codomain  is an upper bound of , if (x) for each  in . The function  is further said to be an upper bound of a set of functions, if it is an upper bound of each function in that set.The notion of lower bound for (sets of) functions is defined analogously, by replacing ≥ with  ≤.An upper bound is said to be a tight upper bound, a least upper bound, or a supremum, if no smaller value is an upper bound. Similarly, a lower bound is said to be a tight lower bound, a greatest lower bound, or an infimum, if no greater value is a lower bound.An upper bound  of a subset  of a preordered set  is said to be an exact upper bound for  if every element of  that is strictly majorized by  is also majorized by some element of . Exact upper bounds of reduced products of linear orders play an important role in PCF theory.[5]Greatest element and least elementInfimum and supremumMaximal and minimal elements