substringIn formal language theory and computer science, a substring is a contiguous sequence of characters within a string.[] For instance, "the best of" is a substring of "It was the best of times". In contrast, "Itwastimes" is a subsequence of "It was the best of times", but not a substring.Prefixes and suffixes are special cases of substrings. A prefix of a string  is a substring of  that occurs at the beginning of ; likewise, a suffix of a string  is a substring that occurs at the end of .The substrings of the string "apple" would be:"a", "ap", "app", "appl", "apple","p", "pp", "ppl", "pple","pl", "ple","l", "le""e", "" (note the empty string at the end).A string  is a substring (or factor)[1] of a string  if there exists two strings  and  such that . In particular, the empty string is a substring of every string.Example: The string ana is equal to substrings (and subsequences) of banana at two different offsets:banana ||||| ana||   |||   anaThe first occurrence is obtained with b and na, while the second occurrence is obtained with  ban and  being the empty string.A substring of a string is a prefix of a suffix of the string, and equivalently a suffix of a prefix; for example, nan is a prefix of nana, which is in turn a suffix of banana. If  is a substring of , it is also a subsequence, which is a more general concept. The occurrences of a given pattern in a given string can be found with a string searching algorithm. Finding the longest string which is equal to a substring of two or more strings is known as the longest common substring problem.In the mathematical literature, substrings are also called subwords (in America) or factors (in Europe).[]A string  is a prefix[1] of a string  if there exists a string  such that . A proper prefix of a string is not equal to the string itself;[2] some sources[3] in addition restrict a proper prefix to be non-empty. A prefix can be seen as a special case of a substring.Example: The string ban is equal to a prefix (and substring and subsequence) of the string banana:banana|||banThe square subset symbol is sometimes used to indicate a prefix, so that  denotes that  is a prefix of . This defines a binary relation on strings, called the prefix relation, which is a particular kind of prefix order.A string  is a suffix[1] of a string  if there exists a string  such that . A proper suffix of a string is not equal to the string itself. A more restricted interpretation is that it is also not empty.[1] A suffix can be seen as a special case of a substring.Example: The string nana is equal to a suffix (and substring and subsequence) of the string banana:banana  ||||  nanaA suffix tree for a string is a trie data structure that represents all of its suffixes. Suffix trees have large numbers of applications in string algorithms. The suffix array is a simplified version of this data structure that lists the start positions of the suffixes in alphabetically sorted order; it has many of the same applications.A border is suffix and prefix of the same string, e.g. "bab" is a border of "babab" (and also of "baboon eating a kebab").[]A superstring of a finite set  of strings is a single string that contains every string in  as a substring. For example,  is a superstring of , and  is a shorter one. Concatenating all members of , in arbitrary order, always obtains a trivial superstring of . Finding superstrings whose length is as small as possible is a more interesting problem. A string that contains every possible permutation of a specified character set is called a superpermutation.Brace notationSubstring indexSuffix automaton