Chinese_remainder_theoremIn mathematics, the Chinese remainder theorem states that if one knows the remainders of the Euclidean division of an integer n by several integers, then one can determine uniquely the remainder of the division of n by the product of these integers, under the condition that the divisors are pairwise coprime (no two divisors share a common factor other than 1).For example, if we know that the remainder of n divided by 3 is 2, the remainder of n divided by 5 is 3, and the remainder of n divided by 7 is 2, then without knowing the value of n, we can determine that the remainder of n divided by 105 (the product of 3, 5, and 7) is 23. Importantly, this tells us that if n is a natural number less than 105, then 23 is the only possible value of n.The earliest known statement of the theorem is by the Chinese mathematician Sun-tzu in the Sun-tzu Suan-ching in the 3rd century CE.The Chinese remainder theorem is widely used for computing with large integers, as it allows replacing a computation for which one knows a bound on the size of the result by several similar computations on small integers.The Chinese remainder theorem (expressed in terms of congruences) is true over every principal ideal domain. It has been generalized to any ring, with a formulation involving two-sided ideals.The earliest known statement of the theorem, as a problem with specific numbers, appears in the 3rd-century book Sun-tzu Suan-ching by the Chinese mathematician Sun-tzu:[1]There are certain things whose number is unknown. If we count them by threes, we have two left over; by fives, we have three left over; and by sevens, two are left over. How many things are there?[2]Sun-tzu's work contains neither a proof nor a full algorithm.[3] What amounts to an algorithm for solving this problem was described by Aryabhata (6th century).[4] Special cases of the Chinese remainder theorem were also known to Brahmagupta (7th century), and appear in Fibonacci's Liber Abaci (1202).[5] The result was later generalized with a complete solution called Da-yan-shu () in Ch'in Chiu-shao's 1247 Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections (, Shu-shu Chiu-chang)[6] which was translated into English in early 19th century by British missionary Alexander Wylie.[7]The notion of congruences was first introduced and used by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae of 1801.[9] Gauss illustrates the Chinese remainder theorem on a problem involving calendars, namely, "to find the years that have a certain period number with respect to the solar and lunar cycle and the Roman indiction."[10] Gauss introduces a procedure for solving the problem that had already been used by Leonhard Euler but was in fact an ancient method that had appeared several times.[11]Let n1, ..., nk be integers greater than 1, which are often called moduli or divisors. Let us denote by N the product of the ni.The Chinese remainder theorem asserts that if the ni are pairwise coprime, and if a1, ..., ak are integers such that 0 ≤ ai &lt; ni for every i, then there is one and only one integer x, such that 0 ≤ x &lt; N and the remainder of the Euclidean division of x by ni is ai for every i.This may be restated as follows in terms of congruences:If the  are pairwise coprime, and if a1, ..., ak are any integers, then the systemhas a solution, and any two solutions, say x1 and x2, are congruent modulo N, that is, .[12]In abstract algebra, the theorem is often restated as: if the ni are pairwise coprime, the mapdefines a ring isomorphism[13]between the ring of integers modulo N and the direct product of the rings of integers modulo the ni. This means that for doing a sequence of arithmetic operations in  one may do the same computation independently in each  and then get the result by applying the isomorphism (from the right to the left). This may be much faster than the direct computation if N and the number of operations are large. This is widely used, under the name multi-modular computation, for linear algebra over the integers or the rational numbers.The theorem can also be restated in the language of combinatorics as the fact that the infinite arithmetic progressions of integers form a Helly family.[14]The existence and the uniqueness of the solution may be proven independently. However, the first proof of existence, given below, uses this uniqueness.Suppose that  and  are both solutions to all the congruences. As  and  give the same remainder, when divided by , their difference  is a multiple of each . As the  are pairwise coprime, their product  also divides , and thus  and  are congruent modulo . If  and   are supposed to be non-negative and less than  (as in the first statement of the theorem), then their difference may be a multiple of  only if .The mapmaps congruence classes modulo  to sequences of congruence classes modulo . The proof of uniqueness shows that this map is injective. As the domain and the codomain of this map have the same number of elements, the map is also surjective, which proves the existence of the solution.This proof is very simple but does not provide any direct way for computing a solution. Moreover, it cannot be generalized to other situations where the following proof can.Existence may be established by an explicit construction of .[15] This construction may be split into two steps, first solving the problem in the case of two moduli, and then extending this solution to the general case by induction on the number of moduli.We want to solve the system:where  and  are coprime.Bézout's identity asserts the existence of two integers  and  such that The integers  and  may be computed by the extended Euclidean algorithm.A solution is given byIndeed, implying that  The second congruence is proved similarly, by exchanging the subscripts 1 and 2.Consider a sequence of congruence equations:where the  are pairwise coprime. The two first equations have a solution  provided by the method of the previous section. The set of the solutions of these two first equations is the set of all solutions of the equationAs the other  are coprime with  this reduces solving the initial problem of  equations to a similar problem with  equations. Iterating the process, one gets eventually the solutions of the initial problem.For constructing a solution, it is not necessary to make an induction on the number of moduli. However, such a direct construction involves more computation with large numbers, which makes it less efficient and less used. Nevertheless, Lagrange interpolation is a special case of this construction, applied to polynomials instead of integers.Let  be the product of all moduli but one. As the  are pairwise coprime,  and  are coprime. Thus Bézout's identity applies, and there exist integers  and  such thatA solution of the system of congruences isIn fact, as  is a multiple of  for we havefor every Consider a system of congruences:where the  are pairwise coprime, and let  In this section several methods are described for computing the unique solution for , such that  and these methods are applied on the exampleIt is easy to check whether a value of  is a solution: it suffices to compute the remainder of the Euclidean division of  by each . Thus, to find the solution, it suffices to check successively the integers from  to  until finding the solution.Although very simple, this method is very inefficient. For the simple example considered here,  integers (including ) have to be checked for finding the solution, which is . This is an exponential time algorithm, as the size of the input is, up to a constant factor, the number of digits of , and the average number of operations is of the order of .Therefore, this method is rarely used, neither for hand-written computation nor on computers.The search of the solution may be made dramatically faster by sieving. For this method, we suppose, without loss of generality, that  (if it were not the case, it would suffice to replace each  by the remainder of its division by ). This implies that the solution belongs to the arithmetic progressionBy testing the values of these numbers modulo  one eventually finds a solution  of the two first congruences. Then the solution belongs to the arithmetic progression Testing the values of these numbers modulo , and continuing until every modulus has been tested gives eventually the solution.This method is faster if the moduli have been ordered by decreasing value, that is if  For the example, this gives the following computation. We consider first the numbers that are congruent to 4 modulo 5 (the largest modulus), which are 4, , , ... For each of them, compute the remainder by 4 (the second largest modulus) until getting a number congruent to 3 modulo 4. Then one can proceed  by adding  at each step, and computing only the remainders by 3. This gives4 mod 4 → 0. Continue4 + 5 = 9 mod 4 →1.  Continue9 + 5 = 14 mod 4 → 2. Continue14 + 5 = 19 mod 4 → 3. OK, continue by considering remainders modulo 3 and adding 5 × 4 = 20 each time19 mod 3 → 1. Continue19 + 20 = 39 mod 3 → 0. OK, this is the result.This method works well for hand-written computation with a product of moduli that is not too big. However, it is much slower than other methods, for very large products of moduli. Although dramatically faster than the systematic search, this method also has an exponential time complexity and is therefore not used on computers.The constructive existence proof shows that, in the case of two moduli, the solution may be obtained by the computation of the Bézout coefficients of the moduli, followed by a few multiplications, additions and reductions modulo  (for getting a result in the interval ). As the Bézout's coefficients may be computed with the extended Euclidean algorithm, the whole computation, at most, has a quadratic time complexity of  where  denotes the number of digits of For more than two moduli, the method for two moduli allows the replacement of any two congruences by a single congruence modulo the product of the moduli. Iterating this process provides eventually the solution with a complexity, which is quadratic in the number of digits of the product of all moduli. This quadratic time complexity does not depend on the order in which the moduli are regrouped. One may regroup the two first moduli, then regroup the resulting modulus with the next one, and so on. This strategy is the easiest to implement, but it also requires more computation involving large numbers.Another strategy consists in partitioning the moduli in pairs whose product have comparable sizes (as much as possible), applying, in parallel, the method of two moduli to each pair, and iterating with a number of moduli approximatively divided by two. This method allows an easy parallelization of the algorithm. Also, if fast algorithms (that is, algorithms working in quasilinear time) are used for the basic operations, this method provides an algorithm for the whole computation that works in quasilinear time.On the current example (which has only three moduli), both strategies are identical and work as follows.Bézout's identity for 3 and 4 isPutting this in the formula given for proving the existence gives for a solution of the two first congruences, the other solutions being obtained by adding to −9 any multiple of . One may continue with any of these solutions, but the solution  is smaller (in absolute value) and thus leads probably to an easier computationBézout identity for 5 and 3 × 4 = 12 isApplying the same formula again, we get a solution of the problem:The other solutions are obtained by adding any multiple of , and the smallest positive solution is .The system of congruences solved by the Chinese remainder theorem may be rewritten as a system of linear Diophantine equations:where the unknown integers are  and the  Therefore, every general method for solving such systems may be used for finding the solution of Chinese remainder theorem, such as the reduction of the matrix of the system to Smith normal form or Hermite normal form. However, as usual when using a general algorithm for a more specific problem, this approach is less efficient than the method of the preceding section, based on a direct use of Bézout's identity.In § Statement, the Chinese remainder theorem has been stated in three different ways: in terms of remainders, of congruences, and of a ring isomorphism. The statement in terms of remainders does not apply, in general, to principal ideal domains, as remainders are not defined in such rings. However, the two other versions make sense over a principal ideal domain : it suffices to replace "integer" by "element of the domain" and  by  . These two versions of the theorem are true in this context, because the proofs (except for the first existence proof), are based on Euclid's lemma and Bézout's identity, which are true over every principal domain.However, in general, the theorem is only an existence theorem and does not provide any way for computing the solution, unless one has an algorithm for computing the coefficients of Bézout's identity.The statement in terms of remainders given in § Theorem statement cannot be generalized to any principal ideal domain, but its generalization to Euclidean domains is straightforward. The univariate polynomials over a field is the typical example of a Euclidean domain which is not the integers. Therefore, we state the theorem for the case of the ring  for a field  For getting the theorem for a general Euclidean domain, it suffices to replace the degree by the Euclidean function of the Euclidean domain.The Chinese remainder theorem for polynomials is thus: Let  (the moduli) be, for , pairwise coprime polynomials in . Let  be the degree of , and  be the sum of the If  are polynomials such that  or  for every , then, there is one and only one polynomial , such that  and the remainder of the Euclidean division of  by  is  for every .The construction of the solution may be done as in § Existence (constructive proof) or § Existence (direct proof). However, the latter construction may be simplified by using, as follows, partial fraction decomposition instead of the extended Euclidean algorithm.Thus, we want to find a polynomial , which satisfies the congruencesfor Consider the polynomialsThe partial fraction decomposition of  gives  polynomials  with degrees  such thatand thusThen a solution of the simultaneous congruence system is given by the polynomialIn fact, we havefor This solution may have a degree larger that  The unique solution of degree less than  may be deduced by considering the remainder  of the Euclidean division of  by  This solution is A special case of Chinese remainder theorem for polynomials is Lagrange interpolation. For this, consider  monic polynomials of degree one:They are pairwise coprime if the  are all different. The remainder of the division by  of a polynomial  is Now, let  be constants (polynomials of degree 0) in  Both Lagrange interpolation and Chinese remainder theorem assert the existence of a unique polynomial  of degree less than  such thatfor every Lagrange interpolation formula is exactly the result, in this case, of the above construction of the solution. More precisely, letThe partial fraction decomposition of  isIn fact, reducing the right-hand side to a common denominator one getsand the numerator is equal to one, as being a polynomial of degree less than  which takes the value one for  different values of Using the above general formula, we get the Lagrange interpolation formula:Hermite interpolation is an application of the Chinese remainder theorem for univariate polynomials, which may involve moduli of arbitrary degrees (Lagrange interpolation involves only moduli of degree one).The problem consists of finding a polynomial of the least possible degree, such that the polynomial and its first derivatives take given values at some fixed points.More precisely, let  be  elements of the ground field  and, for  let  be the values of the first  derivatives of the sought polynomial at  (including the 0th derivative, which is the value of the polynomial itself). The problem is to find a polynomial  such that its j th derivative takes the value  at  for  and Consider the polynomialThis is the Taylor polynomial of order  at , of the unknown polynomial  Therefore, we must haveConversely, any polynomial  that satisfies these  congruences, in particular verifies, for any therefore  is its Taylor polynomial of order  at , that is,  solves the initial Hermite interpolation problem.The Chinese remainder theorem asserts that there exists exactly one polynomial of degree less than the sum of the  which satisfies these  congruences.There are several ways for computing the solution  One may use the method described at the beginning of § Over univariate polynomial rings and Euclidean domains. One may also use the constructions given in § Existence (constructive proof) or § Existence (direct proof).The Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to non-coprime moduli. Let  be any integers, let ; , and consider the system of congruences:If , then this system has a unique solution modulo . Otherwise, it has no solutions.If we use Bézout's identity to write , then the solution isThis defines an integer, as  divides both  and . Otherwise, the proof is very similar to that for coprime moduli.The Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to any ring, by using coprime ideals (also called comaximal ideals). Two ideals  and  are coprime if there are elements  and  such that  This relation plays the role of Bézout's identity in the proofs related to this generalization, which otherwise are very similar. The generalization may be stated as follows.[16][17]Let  be two-sided ideals of a ring  and let  be their intersection. If the ideals are pairwise coprime, we have the isomorphism: between the quotient ring  and the direct product of the where "" denotes the image of the element  in the quotient ring defined by the ideal Moreover, if  is commutative, then the ideal intersection of pairwise coprime ideals is equal to their product; that isif  and  are coprime for all .Let  be pairwise coprime two-sided ideals with  and be the isomorphism defined above. Let  be the element of  whose components are all  except the  th which is , and The  are central idempotents that are pairwise orthogonal; this means, in particular, that  and  for every  and . Moreover, one has  and In summary, this generalized Chinese remainder theorem is the equivalence between giving pairwise coprime two-sided ideals with a zero intersection, and giving central and pairwise orthogonal idempotents that sum to .[18]The Chinese remainder theorem has been used to construct a Gödel numbering for sequences, which is involved in the proof of Gödel's incompleteness theorems.The prime-factor FFT algorithm (also called Good-Thomas algorithm) uses the Chinese remainder theorem for reducing the computation of a fast Fourier transform of size  to the computation of two fast Fourier transforms of smaller sizes  and  (providing that  and  are coprime).Most implementations of RSA use the Chinese remainder theorem during signing of HTTPS certificates and during decryption.The Chinese remainder theorem can also be used in secret sharing, which consists of distributing a set of shares among a group of people who, all together (but no one alone), can recover a certain secret from the given set of shares. Each of the shares is represented in a congruence, and the solution of the system of congruences using the Chinese remainder theorem is the secret to be recovered. Secret sharing using the Chinese remainder theorem uses, along with the Chinese remainder theorem, special sequences of integers that guarantee the impossibility of recovering the secret from a set of shares with less than a certain cardinality.The range ambiguity resolution techniques used with medium pulse repetition frequency radar can be seen as a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem.Given a surjection  of finite abelian groups, we can use the Chinese remainder theorem to give a complete description of any such map. First of all, the theorem gives isomorphismswhere . In addition, for any induced mapfrom the original surjection, we have  and  since for a pair of primes , the only non-zero surjectionscan be defined if  and .These observations are pivotal for constructing the ring of profinite integers, which is given as an inverse limit of all such maps.Dedekind's theorem on the linear independence of characters. Let  be a monoid and  an integral domain, viewed as a monoid by considering the multiplication on . Then any finite family  of distinct monoid homomorphisms  is linearly independent. In other words, every family  of elements  satisfying must be equal to the family .Proof. First assume that  is a field, otherwise, replace the integral domain  by its quotient field, and nothing will change. We can linearly extend the monoid homomorphisms  to -algebra homomorphisms , where  is the monoid ring of  over . Then, by linearity, the conditionyieldsNext, for  the two -linear maps  and  are not proportional to each other. Otherwise  and  would also be proportional, and thus equal since as monoid homomorphisms they satisfy: , which contradicts the assumption that they are distinct.Therefore, the kernels  and  are distinct. Since  is a field,  is a maximal ideal of  for every  in . Because they are distinct and maximal the ideals  and  are coprime whenever . The Chinese Remainder Theorem (for general rings) yields an isomorphism:whereConsequently, the mapis surjective. Under the isomorphisms  the map  corresponds to:Now,yieldsfor every vector  in the image of the map . Since  is surjective, this means thatfor every vectorConsequently, . QED.Covering systemHasse principleResidue number systemDauben, Joseph W. (2007), "Chapter 3: Chinese Mathematics",  in Katz, Victor J. (ed.), The Mathematics of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, India and Islam : A Sourcebook, Princeton University Press, pp. 187–384, ISBN 978-0-691-11485-9Dence, Joseph B.; Dence, Thomas P. (1999), Elements of the Theory of Numbers, Academic Press, ISBN 9780122091308Duchet, Pierre (1995), "Hypergraphs",  in Graham, R. L.; Grötschel, M.; Lovász, L. (eds.), Handbook of combinatorics, Vol. 1, 2, Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 381–432, MR 1373663. See in particular Section 2.5, "Helly Property", pp. 393–394.Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1986), Disquisitiones Arithemeticae, translated by Clarke, Arthur A. (Second, corrected ed.), New York: Springer, ISBN 978-0-387-96254-2Ireland, Kenneth; Rosen, Michael (1990), A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory (2nd ed.), Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-97329-XKak, Subhash (1986), "Computational aspects of the Aryabhata algorithm" , Indian Journal of History of Science, 21 (1): 62–71Katz, Victor J. (1998),  (2nd ed.), Addison Wesley Longman, ISBN 978-0-321-01618-8Libbrecht, Ulrich (1973), Chinese Mathematics in the Thirteenth Century: the "Shu-shu Chiu-chang" of Ch'in Chiu-shao, Dover Publications Inc, ISBN 978-0-486-44619-6Ore, Oystein (1988) [1948], , Dover, ISBN 978-0-486-65620-5Pisano, Leonardo (2002), Fibonacci's Liber Abaci, translated by Sigler, Laurence E., Springer-Verlag, pp. 402–403, ISBN 0-387-95419-8Rosen, Kenneth H. (1993), Elementary Number Theory and its Applications (3rd ed.), Addison-Wesley, ISBN 978-0201-57889-8Sengupta, Ambar N. (2012), Representing Finite Groups, A Semimsimple Introduction, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4614-1232-8Bourbaki, N. (1989). Algebra I. Springer. ISBN 3-540-64243-9.Cormen, Thomas H.; Leiserson, Charles E.; Rivest, Ronald L.; Stein, Clifford (2001), Introduction to Algorithms (Second ed.), MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-262-03293-7. See Section 31.5: The Chinese remainder theorem, pp. 873–876.Ding, Cunsheng; Pei, Dingyi; Salomaa, Arto (1996), Chinese Remainder Theorem: Applications in Computing, Coding, Cryptography, World Scientific Publishing, pp. 1–213, ISBN 981-02-2827-9Hungerford, Thomas W. (1974), Algebra, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Vol. 73, Springer-Verlag, pp. 131–132, ISBN 978-1-4612-6101-8Knuth, Donald (1997), The Art of Computer Programming, vol. 2: Seminumerical Algorithms (Third ed.), Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-201-89684-2. See Section 4.3.2 (pp. 286–291), exercise 4.6.2–3 (page 456)."Chinese remainder theorem", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press, 2001 [1994]Chinese Remainder Theorem at PlanetMath.Full text of the Sun-tzu Suan-ching (Chinese) –  Chinese Text Project