reachableIn graph theory, reachability refers to the ability to get from one vertex to another within a graph. A vertex  can reach a vertex  (and  is reachable from ) if there exists a sequence of adjacent vertices (i.e. a walk) which starts with  and ends with .In an undirected graph, reachability between all pairs of vertices can be determined by identifying the connected components of the graph. Any pair of vertices in such a graph can reach each other if and only if they belong to the same connected component; therefore, in such a graph, reachability is symmetric ( reaches  iff  reaches ). The connected components of an undirected graph can be identified in linear time. The remainder of this article focuses on the more difficult problem of determining pairwise reachability in a directed graph (which, incidentally, need not be symmetric).For a directed graph , with vertex set  and edge set , the reachability relation of  is the transitive closure of , which is to say the set of all ordered pairs  of vertices in  for which there exists a sequence of vertices  such that the edge  is in  for all .[1]If  is acyclic, then its reachability relation is a partial order; any partial order may be defined in this way, for instance as the reachability relation of its transitive reduction.[2] A noteworthy consequence of this is that since partial orders are anti-symmetric, if  can reach , then we know that  cannot reach . Intuitively, if we could travel from  to  and back to , then  would contain a cycle, contradicting that it is acyclic.If  is directed but not acyclic (i.e. it contains at least one cycle), then its reachability relation will correspond to a preorder instead of a partial order.[3]Algorithms for determining reachability fall into two classes: those that require preprocessing and those that do not.If you have only one (or a few) queries to make, it may be more efficient to forgo the use of more complex data structures and compute the reachability of the desired pair directly.  This can be accomplished in linear time using algorithms such as breadth first search or iterative deepening depth-first search.[4]If you will be making many queries, then a more sophisticated method may be used; the exact choice of method depends on the nature of the graph being analysed. In exchange for preprocessing time and some extra storage space, we can create a data structure which can then answer reachability queries on any pair of vertices in as low as  time.  Three different algorithms and data structures for three different, increasingly specialized situations are outlined below.The Floyd–Warshall algorithm[5] can be used to compute the transitive closure of any directed graph, which gives rise to the reachability relation as in the definition, above.The algorithm requires  time and  space in the worst case. This algorithm is not solely interested in reachability as it also computes the shortest path distance between all pairs of vertices. For graphs containing negative cycles, shortest paths may be undefined, but reachability between pairs can still be noted.For planar digraphs, a much faster method is available, as described by Mikkel Thorup in 2004.[6] This method can answer reachability queries on a planar graph in  time after spending  preprocessing time to create a data structure of  size. This algorithm can also supply approximate shortest path distances, as well as route information.The overall approach is to associate with each vertex a relatively small set of so-called separator paths such that any path from a vertex  to any other vertex  must go through at least one of the separators associated with  or .  An outline of the reachability related sections follows.Given a graph , the algorithm begins by organizing the vertices into layers starting from an arbitrary vertex . The layers are built in alternating steps by first considering all vertices reachable from the previous step (starting with just ) and then all vertices which reach to the previous step until all vertices have been assigned to a layer. By construction of the layers, every vertex appears at most two layers, and every directed path, or dipath, in  is contained within two adjacent layers  and . Let  be the last layer created, that is, the lowest value for  such that .The graph is then re-expressed as a series of digraphs  where each  and where  is the contraction of all previous levels  into a single vertex. Because every dipath appears in at most two consecutive layers, and becauseeach  is formed by two consecutive layers, every dipath in  appears in its entirety in at least one  (and no more than 2 consecutive such graphs)For each , three separators are identified which, when removed, break the graph into three components which each contain at most  the vertices of the original. As  is built from two layers of opposed dipaths, each separator may consist of up to 2 dipaths, for a total of up to 6 dipaths over all of the separators. Let  be this set of dipaths. The proof that such separators can always be found is related to the Planar Separator Theorem of Lipton and Tarjan, and these separators can be located in linear time.For each , the directed nature of  provides for a natural indexing of its vertices from the start to the end of the path. For each vertex  in , we locate the first vertex in  reachable by , and the last vertex in  that reaches to . That is, we are looking at how early into  we can get from , and how farwe can stay in  and still get back to . This information is stored witheach . Then for any pair of vertices  and ,  can reach  via  if  connects to  earlier than  connects from .Every vertex is labelled as above for each step of the recursion which builds. As this recursion has logarithmic depth, a total of extra information is stored per vertex. From this point, alogarithmic time query for reachability is as simple as looking over each pairof labels for a common, suitable . The original paper then works to tune thequery time down to .In summarizing the analysis of this method, first consider that the layeringapproach partitions the vertices so that each vertex is considered only times. The separator phase of the algorithm breaks the graph into componentswhich are at most  the size of the original graph, resulting in alogarithmic recursion depth.  At each level of the recursion, only linear workis needed to identify the separators as well as the connections possible betweenvertices. The overall result is  preprocessing time with only additional information stored for each vertex.An even faster method for pre-processing, due to T. Kameda in 1975,[7]can be used if the graph is planar, acyclic, and also exhibits the following additional properties: all 0-indegree and all 0-outdegree vertices appear on the same face (often assumed to be the outer face), and it is possible to partition the boundary of that face into two parts such that all 0-indegree vertices appear on one part, and all0-outdegree vertices appear on the other (i.e. the two types of vertices do not alternate).If  exhibits these properties, then we can preprocess the graph in only time, and store only  extra bits per vertex, answeringreachability queries for any pair of vertices in  time with a simplecomparison.Preprocessing performs the following steps. We add a new vertex  which has an edge to each 0-indegree vertex, and another new vertex  with edges from each 0-outdegree vertex. Note that the properties of  allow us to do so while maintaining planarity, that is, there will still be no edge crossings after these additions. For each vertex we store the list of adjacencies (out-edges) in order of the planarity of the graph (for example, clockwise with respect to the graph's embedding). We then initialize a counter  and begin a Depth-First Traversal from . During this traversal, the adjacency list of each vertex is visited from left-to-right as needed.  As vertices are popped from the traversal's stack, they are labelled with the value , and  is then decremented. Note that  is always labelled with the value  and  is always labelled with .  The depth-first traversal is then repeated, but this time the adjacency list of each vertex is visited from right-to-left.When completed,  and , and their incident edges, are removed. Eachremaining vertex stores a 2-dimensional label with values from  to .Given two vertices  and , and their labels  and , we say that  if and only if , , and there exists at least one component  or  which is strictlyless than  or , respectively.The main result of this method then states that  is reachable from  if andonly if , which is easily calculated in  time.A related problem is to solve reachability queries with some number  of vertex failures. For example: "Can vertex  still reach vertex  even though vertices  have failed and can no longer be used?" A similar problem may consider edge failures rather than vertex failures, or a mix of the two. The breadth-first search technique works just as well on such queries, but constructing an efficient oracle is more challenging.[8][9]Another problem related to reachability queries is in quickly recalculating changes to reachability relationships when some portion of the graph is changed. For example, this is a relevant concern to garbage collection which needs to balance the reclamation of memory (so that it may be reallocated) with the performance concerns of the running application.Gammoidst-connectivity