concave_functionIn mathematics, a concave function is the negative of a convex function. A concave function is also synonymously called concave downwards, concave down, convex upwards, convex cap, or upper convex.A real-valued function  on an interval (or, more generally, a convex set in vector space) is said to be concave if, for any  and  in the interval and for any ,[1]A function is called strictly concave iffor any  and .For a function , this second definition merely states that for every  strictly between  and , the point  on the graph of  is above the straight line joining the points  and .A function  is quasiconcave if the upper contour sets of the function  are convex sets.[2]A differentiable function  is (strictly) concave on an interval if and only if its derivative function   is (strictly) monotonically decreasing on that interval, that is, a concave function has a non-increasing (decreasing) slope.[3][4]Points where concavity changes (between concave and convex) are inflection points.[5]If  is twice-differentiable, then  is concave if and only if  is non-positive (or, informally, if the "acceleration" is non-positive). If its second derivative is negative then it is strictly concave, but the converse is not true, as shown by .If  is concave and differentiable, then it is bounded above by its first-order Taylor approximation:[2] A Lebesgue measurable function on an interval  is concave if and only if it is midpoint concave, that is, for any  and  in  If a function  is concave, and , then  is subadditive on . Proof:Since  is concave and , letting  we have For : A function  is concave over a convex set if and only if the function   is a convex function over the set.The sum of two concave functions is itself concave and so is the pointwise minimum of two concave functions, i.e. the set of concave functions on a given domain form a semifield.Near a local maximum in the interior of the domain of a function, the function must be concave; as a partial converse, if the derivative of a strictly concave function is zero at some point, then that point is a local maximum.Any local maximum of a concave function is also a global maximum. A strictly concave function will have at most one global maximum.The functions  and  are concave on their domains, as their second derivatives  and  are always negative.The logarithm function  is concave on its domain , as its derivative  is a strictly decreasing function.Any affine function  is both concave and convex, but neither strictly-concave nor strictly-convex.The sine function is concave on the interval .The function , where  is the determinant of a nonnegative-definite matrix B, is concave.[6]Rays bending in the computation of radiowave attenuation in the atmosphere involve concave functions.In expected utility theory for choice under uncertainty, cardinal utility functions of risk averse decision makers are concave.In microeconomic theory, production functions are usually assumed to be concave over some or all of their domains, resulting in diminishing returns to input factors.[7]Concave polygonJensen's inequalityLogarithmically concave functionQuasiconcave functionConcavificationCrouzeix, J.-P. (2008). "Quasi-concavity".  In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E (eds.). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 815–816. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.1375. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.Rao, Singiresu S. (2009). Engineering Optimization: Theory and Practice. John Wiley and Sons. p. 779. ISBN 978-0-470-18352-6.